Hello London!

Today I want to talk about a project that I've been working on lately.

It's a book
to explore ways
how to make a book.

The book collects documentation, ideas, software, graphic design and 
experiments made with free software between 2008 and 2016. This collection 
is complemented by inspirational writings on different aspects of free 
culture generously made available by their authors under copyleft licenses.

Unfortunately it is not completely finished right now. These images are 
from the first proof.

The setup for this project is connected to an ongoing attempt, which
is to find a personal approach to do layout in the sense of developing
a practise that may include questioning the current status quo from
and within digital publishing.

There were some references (or better preferences) I had in mind when 
starting this. I was imagining something not too different from HTML.
HTML has been for me the first exposure to the possibilities to write
code to create visual form. Something I'v been excited about since then.

BUT: It should be a little bit different to read and write.
     Still finding out what this means exactly.
AND: It should work for print.

About 2 years ago I wrote a little etherpad2pdf utility. Basically a more 
or less standard pandoc procedure.


(to not forget this completely
 as I will mention more often:

 PANDOC  IS A HASKELL LIBRARY FOR CONVERTING
 FROM ONE MARKUP FORMAT TO ANOTHER,
 AND A COMMAND-LINE TOOL THAT USES THIS LIBRARY.)


It became clear that this combination was going into the right direction.
This means:

- a lightweight markup language that is easy to read and edit
  in its raw form
- this simple markup will be translated in the next step into
  a more powerful and complex markup language (as LaTeX)
- this more complex markup should be a widespread standard 
  to have access and support for a bigger range of tools.

BUT: I had the ambition for a little more complexity than what seemed
     possible with standard markdown.

One thing for example I was really missing when using markdown was the 
possibility to have comments. Comments are more or less standard for most 
types of source code. This means you may have some kind of information 
written within the text which is not part of the actual output. Normally 
I'd use comments:

- to describe something
- to remember something
- to disable parts without deleting

Unfortunately standard markdown has no comments. So I decided to add the 
possibility to have comments, just as some plugged-on functionality.

This meant: instead of processing the markdown source directly, all lines 
starting with a % sign have to be removed first. This hack also gave me a 
first idea about how things might work.

Motivated by the simplicity of this comment option, I had the idea to pick 
up an original idea of markup.

As described on wikipedia:

> The term markup is derived from
> the traditional publishing practice
> of "marking up" a manuscript,
> which involves adding handwritten
> annotations in the form of conventional
> symbolic printer's instructions in the
> margins and text of a paper manuscript
> or printed proof. For centuries, this
> task was done primarily by skilled
> typographers known as "markup men"
> or "copy markers" who marked up text
> to indicate what typeface, style, and size
> should be applied to each part, and then
> passed the manuscript to others for typesetting
> by hand. 
> [*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markup_language)

or shorter: instructions describing the form of the content are written
            along the content as comments.

As I was not planning to pass the manuscript to others for typesetting
by hand I had to deal with the question: How will the instructions be 
understood and handled?

The basic translation from markdown to LaTeX is handled by pandoc.
The translation of the 'instructions'needs to be handled separately.
I decided  to do this by creating a dictionary where you would look
up the  instructions.

IMPORTANT: the vocabulary is not final,
           the dictionary is never finished.
It may be extended by adding new instructions to the dictionary just as 
needed. Instructions that don't exist in the dictionary will be ignored.

Most instructions were not developed in advance, but written right when 
they were needed. Some of these instructions made more sense and where 
used quite often. Others were too specific or unflexible and just 
disapeared.

This is a list of instructions/functions made until today. Some of them 
have telling names, that's the more ideal case. Some of them are more 
cryptic.

Different dictionaries allow different translations. In the beginning the 
dictionaries were intended to extend and change the vocabulary on-the-fly. 
But they proofed quite practical to support different output formats. 
Different dictionaries define instructions according to the requirements 
of the output format.

Some instructions should produce a similar effect, although there may 
happen quite different things in the background. Other instructions were 
created with a specific output in mind. A very targeted behaviour for 
example is everything related to pages.

BECAUSE:

For example the '% CLEARTORIGHT' instruction, which pushes the content
to the next right page when making a book There are no left and right 
pages in HTML. When defining the dictionary for the HTML output 
'% CLEARTORIGHT' could be either ignored or I can think about the wanted
effect of '% CLEARTORIGHT' and try to find an equivalent
e.g. insert vertical space.

AND AGAIN: the dictionary may changed or extended while writing.
           There is no definitive vocabulary,
           there is no definitive meaning.

% ------------

  What do we have?

- shared source code
- translated according to different dictionaries
- leading to different output

'Shared source code' means that sources may be and are shared for 
different output formats, in parts but not necessarily as a whole.

A core functionality and prerequisite for the 'shared source' approach is 
the '% INCLUDE' instruction, which, as it says, allows to include parts of 
source files based on line numbers. (btw: this is far from new). This 
allows to store a resource once, yet distributing it for reuse in multiple 
documents.

To include by line numbers is actually a big potential problem, because it 
presumes that the source does not change. This is not so nice (and close to 
impossible to ensure) when working within collaborative settings. But there 
is something like an happy accident, at least something that was not 
planned from the beginning, but seems more and more crucial to make the 
whole thing work. (+ it makes it much more interesting)

Since using mostly remote sources from etherpad and git, it really makes 
no difference if I refer to a file or to a specific version of a file.

This can be mixed. There can be material which is always at its latest 
state, with the advantage and disadvantage that it can change. And there 
can be material as they were at a specific moment in time. To make it even 
more complex: versions in time may refer to versions in time. This works 
basically for anything in a git repository.

What you can see here is the current source for the book.
Distributed across the network, frozen in time.

From making a bookmaking workflow I came more and more towards imagining
a source format, which is in a way disconnected from how it will exactly
be processed.

I just want to show 2 concepts that developed around this imagined source 
format.

Number one is the use of the Libre Office as a wysiwyg interface to create 
and edit the source files. While the idea was primarily to not force the 
editors into my workflow, it also easified versioning and inclusion within 
the rest of the setup. Libre Office became one more player within the 
workflow. It was added as an interface, but not meant to replace anything.

The second idea is inspired by discussions about the dominance of plain 
text culture. It's a interface based on hotglue made for the very specific 
task to sort and select posters from huge collections. While it is a 
visual approach, it is not wysiwyg. Source code is generated from the 
visual selections, plain text is generated according to relations created
visually.

Within both approaches plain text still plays a central role, but not so 
much for editing but as an intermediary format.

And that's where I'm coming back to the title of this talk and I will try 
to add some explanation. Instead of searching or even programming the one 
killer application my biggest interest at the moment is to create and move 
through layers of different complexities. And that's a thing I've learned 
while using GNU's Bourne-Again-SHell,


